feat(android): AOSP observability blog post (#534)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/aospobservability.md

---

> title: Building your own Android hardware observability

Reviewer: Thoughts on the title: "The Android Developer's Observability Journey"?

For those less familiar, Android is the general name of the operating system, whereas AOSP (or Android Open Source Project), is the generic implementation of Android. Generally speaking, companies will build on top of the generic AOSP implementation, and add their own company- and product-specific customizations and proprietary functionality. For example, the Google’s Pixel phones run a priority Pixel version of AOSP, as do Samsung’s Galaxy phones or Amazon’s Fire tablets, to add features or control the device in a way that only make sense at the point in time for Google or Samsung or Amazon customers.

There are definitely many good reasons to build on top of AOSP. Android is really the only option for custom, touch-first experiences, and the popularity and price point of phone, tablet, and watch form factors is really attractive for a lot of different product experiences. Android SoC vendors bundle support for a lot of common capabilities by default: Bluetooth, LTE, Wi-Fi, cameras, batteries, sensors, and more. And Android also has an incredibly strong community and ecosystem, the continued support of Google, and millions of apps and developers.

> But people often don’t distinguish between Android developers and AOSP developers enough. While Android *app* development is incredibly popular especially as a hobby, AOSP development is only really done for work due to the custom SoC required (outside of the LineageOS or GrapheneOS folks). More importantly, the actual work done by Android versus AOSP developers is often totally different. Android *app* developers are generally only involved with product-centric app development (which in itself is a huge problem space), whereas AOSP developers may develop some apps, but also work much closer to the kernel, by writing drivers, implementing vendor or hardware interfaces, creating and updating sepolicy, and more.

Reviewer 2: s/for work/professionally

What this means is that there’s a whole world of Android device- and hardware-specific information and insights, that aren’t served by off the shelf observability tools, and AOSP developers have often been left to build their own tooling.

### The Limits of App Observability

Android developers are very familiar with Android **app** observability tools - everyone by default integrates Crashlytics, Bugsnag, Sentry, Instabug, or another observability SDK. When I worked on an AOSP product, we actually built 10 or so apps to replicate some device functionality, so we had to integrate the observability SDK into all 10 apps. But what about the other 10 to 100 apps and native services that we don't normally touch that were part of the generic AOSP implementation?

> When you build on top of AOSP, you’re actually potentially running 4 different sources of "apps": your own custom-built apps, your SoC vendor’s apps, the generic AOSP apps, and if you have an app store, third-party apps installed from the app store. You can only install an app observability SDK in your own custom-built apps, you can’t install SDKs into all these other apps, so you immediately hit the limit of what information app observability SDKs can provide.

Reviewer 2: When you build a device on top of AOSP

![Apps you don't build yourself can't integrate app observability SDKs](/img/aosp-observability/app-sources.svg)

> There are also 4 kinds of “apps”: (1) the common Android app written in Java or Kotlin, (2) native apps using C++ using the Android NDK, (3) binaries written in C++ or Rust, and (4) init.rc shell services which can invoke the binaries and more. App observability SDKs often come with NDK support, but they run into the same problem of only working on apps you build yourself, and there are 10 to 100 other apps running on the device that aren’t monitored.

Reviewer 2: The 4 types seem a bit muddled (what's the difference between native apps using C++ vs binaries written in C++?). Mention the kernel? Or maybe divide between "apps" whether native or not, vs system services, vs kernel?

### Push vs Pull

This might’ve been sufficient for a while (a very short while), but we thought a better way was to have users send us logs when they encounter a problem, so we created a bug report flow that would zip the log cache and then send an email with the logs attached, plus some information about the device and user.

As time went on though, we started running into more and more situations where the cached logs didn’t actually span the time of the incident, so they were basically useless. This is the natural result of a reactive pull-based model, and so we got to brainstorming what other solutions were possible.

> We eventually landed on the desire for a push-based model - literally a push messaging system, where we could poke the device remotely to trigger an upload. And we designed an app that could query FileProviders and ContentProviders for any additional data. But we hit a couple of roadblocks: our device was not GMS-compliant so we didn’t have Firebase Cloud Messaging and would have to integrate our own push messaging system, and we needed to enlist the help of a backend team to build the push backend and the push trigger, but also a storage solution, and no team had the budget to help and our teams didn’t have the expertise to contribute. This ends up being a common sticking point with internal tools for mobile teams - Android and AOSP developers have a lot of mobile experience and expertise, but often need help creating a maintainable backend solution that makes sense for the volume and cost of storing and processing the data.

Reviewer 2: Define GMS

> We eventually landed on the desire for a push-based model - literally a push messaging system, where we could poke the device remotely to trigger an upload. And we designed an app that could query FileProviders and ContentProviders for any additional data. But we hit a couple of roadblocks: our device was not GMS-compliant so we didn’t have Firebase Cloud Messaging and would have to integrate our own push messaging system, and we needed to enlist the help of a backend team to build the push backend and the push trigger, but also a storage solution, and no team had the budget to help and our teams didn’t have the expertise to contribute. This ends up being a common sticking point with internal tools for mobile teams - Android and AOSP developers have a lot of mobile experience and expertise, but often need help creating a maintainable backend solution that makes sense for the volume and cost of storing and processing the data.

Reviewer: Some real-world context of when this would happen may help to mention here, such as if a customer reports an issue or you get other signals that the device is acting up and want to dig deeper

![The logs that are pulled might not contain useful data from around the time of the incident](/img/aosp-observability/logs-buffer.svg)

### Android Bug Reports

> Logs are one tool to diagnose an issue, but Android has so much more information if you can access it - namely, Android Bug Reports, which gathers data from all over the device into a single zip file. So any AOSP observability solution that can capture and upload logcat logs automatically, may also want to build a way to trigger and upload Android Bug Reports when needed, too. And so Bug Reports are often the second thing that developers build when they just need more AOSP observability.

Reviewer 2: This section makes it sounds like bugreports are the answer (not sure how deep you want to go into the alternatives, but maybe mention e.g. that they contain a complete `dumpsys` dump, which could also be captured individually)

## Understand the trends

> As we encountered more and more bugs, and downloaded more and more logs, several colleagues decided to write a number of different parsers in Python that they would run on the logs to rule out certain problems, or filter the logs for certain crashes. As they encountered more and more issues, if they could identify the issue in the log, they could write a parser for that issue and re-use it for next time.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add an example here of what we'd be looking for in the logs

This kind of speaks to 2 kinds of issues with manually combing through logs:

- While everyone agrees that knowing how to comb through logs is an incredibly valuable skill to develop, at some point in time the tediousness wears on you, and you’d rather have something tell you what and where the useful insight is.
- As the number of devices grows, figuring out the relative scale of an issue by manually parsing each device’s logs becomes infeasible, and you really want to know how many devices are impacted by a certain issue to determine the priority.

> At this point, teams often start to recognize another tool is needed to progress from *debugging* individual devices, to *monitoring* trends across the entire fleet.

Reviewer: This would be a great opportunity to plug [your logging article](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/device-logging) as an aside!

Author: Done

### Buy _and_ Build

Most teams that develop Android hardware already buy Android app observability tools, like Crashlytics, plus a general purpose product analytics tool, like Grafana, for their backend, so it seems natural to try to fit AOSP data into these tools. But these tools are not designed for AOSP, they’re designed for apps or for servers, and so their data models or pricing structures can feel like they don’t make sense.

> - Existing Android app observability tools have a battle-tested data model for Java and Kotlin app crashes and C++ tombstones. But there’s really no way to record any other forms of data, so you have to coerce other kinds of crashes, like kernel panics, into the data model, which can be finicky and tedious to manually manage. -

Reviewer 2: nit: not really tombstones?

Reviewer 2: Also feels like we should mention somewhere here: that part of the solution is collecting the right information on the device (e.g. dropbox + dumpsys vs bugreport) - signal/noise.

> - Combining an Android app observability tool with an product analytics tool might get you the best of both worlds, if you understand all the limitations involved. For example, most observability SDKs are all clearly server-focused (such as by providing a Java SDK as opposed to an Android SDK), so they often have no regard for data usage, bandwidth, battery use, or device performance, and it can be a minefield in a lot of ways.

Reviewer: I don't fully follow whether we need to break out these two points into bullets (I probably need to read this a few times to follow it) -- should they perhaps just be separate paragraphs?

If you can make a decision on what to buy, then it’s up to the team to build whatever pipeline that’ll collect, transform, and send the device-level data into the observability tools. There can be so many interesting decisions to make around whether which kinds of processing belongs on the device versus in the cloud, depending on whether the team can act full-stack or not, what data is being collected, and the costs involved. A dedicated engineer or team may need to be staffed to develop the necessary functionality or to manage its costs.

> ![A simplified view of the eventual AOSP observability pipeline](/img/aosp-observability/analytics-pipeline.svg)

Reviewer: I love this diagram! Can you add a legend explaining the color-coating and introduce the image at the end of the paragraph above? e.g:

"It is a complex pipeline but I tried to break it down into some basic, key pieces below:"

## Conclusion

There's a ton of content on what observability means for Android apps, but content and tooling for AOSP device observability feels sparse in comparison. Most AOSP developers end up building internal observability tooling because of the lack of standard tooling. And most AOSP developers end on a similar journey: they discover the limits of the their apps observability tool, and they figure they want to pull logcat logs, then they find a way to push the logs from the device, and then they think of ways to pull the logs, and then discover even more Android data they want to pull, and then they finally realize they don't want to pull and parse the data individually and manually every time there's a problem.

> One of the reasons I joined Memfault was to build the tooling I wish I had previously, and to help other Android developers working on AOSP avoid going through the same years of struggles, to learn the same lessons I had. And there is still many more lessons in AOSP observability to learn, if you have experience in observability at scale, I'd love to hear from you.

Reviewer 2: I like the narrative - I think it would be great with some example problems that you were trying to diagnose at scale, how logs might have helped you find them on an individual device, but not at the fleet level, etc - then whether either FWLS/L2M or other on-device stuff e.g. dumpsys feeding into a metrics-like system would have helped you.

If this blog is targeted at "monitoring" (vs "debugging") then I think that's a good start (just needs a bit of editing). But I'm wondering if we should also discuss how to make sense of the data for an individual device (i.e. timeline + device dashboard replaces that python tooling, to visualize)

---
title: Building your own Android hardware observability
description: 
author: victorlai
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

In this article, I walk through what a typical journey building internal observability tooling for your AOSP device might look like, and the variety of pitfalls you might encounter as you scale from 1s to 10s to 1000s of Android devices in the field, based off my experience talking to AOSP developers and teams and personally as an Android app developer for AOSP hardware.

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

## Introduction to Android hardware observability

With the popularity of mobile app development over the last decade, many developers are at least vague familiar with what's involved with shipping and maintaining an Android app. But if your only experience is with Android apps, but you're suddenly thrown into a project developing on Android hardware, it can be surprising how the single mobile app is just a tiny fraction of the complexity involved.

> When you ship an Android app to Google's Play Store so it can be installed on Android smartphones from Google, Samsung, Motorola, or some other manufacturer, you're only responsible for delivering a single Android app. But when you deliver Android hardware, there are actually tens (hundreds?) of Android apps on the device to think about &mdash; like Status Bar, Settings, Software Updater, Dialer, Messaging, Documents, Keyboard, and more. And there are even more native services that run as part of the core Android OS. Each custom Android device is also usually ordered from an ODM (Original Design Manufacturer), which customizes the base version of the Android Open Source Project (AOSP) with ODM-specific changes to support that specific SoC (system-on-a-chip) by providing drivers for hardware components. So at the end of the day, at the bare minimum, you're responsible for a device that's running some parts your own Android apps, some parts your ODM's customizations, and the whole of AOSP, which is also itself essentially running a customized version of Linux.

Reviewer: This would be a great spot for a visual that explains all these layers. I think it would ground this intro nicely too.

Author: Made a new diagram 🙏 Maybe could be even better...

To make things even more complicated, if that Android hardware was ordered from an ODM, you might not contractually have access to the source code of the OS (since the ODM would rather not let you see the types and quality of changes to AOSP), which greatly limits your ability to dig into and understand the operation of the device, instead relying on the terms of support in your contract.

This web of complexity might not seem like a big issue, but it is the nature of all software and hardware today that there are bugs, and the more complicated the system, the more complicated the bugs that can arise. It's unrealistic to expect to catch all bugs during development, and so what we need are a variety of tools to help diagnose and fix problems when the hardware is in the field and in our customer's hands.

> ## A journey in collecting device data from the field

Reviewer: I'm wondering if you can break this up into defined phases such as:
- Vague customer reports
- Customer-triggered bug reports
- Logs
- Tombsones, dumpsys, recovery logs
- Scaling backend infrastructure
And then explain the approaches within each that work well, but fall short and lead a team to go to the next phase

Author: Added a few more sections but I don't love them!

Reviewer: I think this is a huge improvement! I think this `##` heading could be more succinct though: "Observability Journey" would work great

If you're developing Android hardware, it's likely the core of your device is likely several standard Android mobile apps, and you can use the mature ecosystem of Android app observability tools like Crashlytics, Bugsnag, Instabug, etc to maintain the quality of those apps.

> The first hiccup in development often happens when a user observes a bug that isn't captured by those existing app observability tools. The user's error report can often be pretty vague (the screen just went black!), so we need a way to get more information from that user's device. And early on in the process of Android development, we may have come across something called [Android bugreports](https://developer.android.com/studio/debug/bug-report), so it's likely we have a process in place for the user to create that report, and then send it to us. In some places I've seen a process where the user is walked through how to create a bugreport and then email it to the engineering team!

Reviewer: If you move away from saying "we", it feels less vague. I also have a few suggestions for cleaning up the language:

```suggestion
The first hiccup in development often arises when a user encounters a bug that isn't captured by existing app observability tools. User error reports can be quite vague (e.g., "the screen just went black!"), making it essential to gather more information from the affected device. Early in the process of Android development, many developers come across Android bugreports, which often leads to establishing a process for users to generate and share these reports. In some cases, users are guided through creating a bugreport and then emailing it to the engineering team.
```
What do you think?

Author: I re-wrote a few of these sections to get rid of a lot more of the first-person words, except in some cases where I'm giving an anecdote

> The first hiccup in development often happens when a user observes a bug that isn't captured by those existing app observability tools. The user's error report can often be pretty vague (the screen just went black!), so we need a way to get more information from that user's device. And early on in the process of Android development, we may have come across something called [Android bugreports](https://developer.android.com/studio/debug/bug-report), so it's likely we have a process in place for the user to create that report, and then send it to us. In some places I've seen a process where the user is walked through how to create a bugreport and then email it to the engineering team!

Reviewer: An idea to bring this to life: maybe there is a screen shot from a popular app that you've seen do this before? 👀

Reviewer: Yes! You can do:

```
<a href="<url>" align="center">
  <img width="650" src="<url>" alt="Telescope gif sending Android bug report" />
</a>
```

It's likely we start encountering situations where the bugreports might not be enough. So we get the idea to upload the device logs as well. We'll quickly discover the different types of [logcat buffers](https://developer.android.com/tools/logcat) on the device: like main, system, or crash, and see that some kernel errors showed up in the system buffer in the past. The size of the buffers are quite small, so you might have to find ways to increase the size of the buffers to persist them for longer. And it could make sense to append these device logs onto the same bugreport system as before.

Over time, this process could improve iteratively, as it's kind of generally good enough. If there isn't enough data in the bugreport, or in the device logs, there might be more areas of AOSP to query and add to be uploaded, like tombstone files, or dumpsys, or recovery logs, or system services. We may eventually refine the backend too, so there's a dedicated area for selecting all the uploaded data from a single device.

> ## Common traps to avoid

Reviewer: These traps would be more digestible with example. Do you have some concrete anecdotes you could add to these?

Author: Added a bunch of anecdotes, perhaps?!?
